Problem Statement
HMMs and Viterbi algorithm for POS tagging
 
You have learnt to build your own HMM-based POS tagger and implement the Viterbi algorithm using the Penn Treebank training corpus. The vanilla Viterbi algorithm we had written had resulted in ~87% accuracy. The approx. 13% loss of accuracy was majorly due to the fact that when the algorithm encountered an unknown word (i.e. not present in the training set, such as 'Twitter'), it assigned an incorrect tag arbitrarily. This is because, for unknown words, the emission probabilities for all candidate tags are 0, so the algorithm arbitrarily chooses (the first) tag.

In this assignment, you need to modify the Viterbi algorithm to solve the problem of unknown words using at least two techniques. Though there could be multiple ways to solve this problem, you may use the following hints:

Which tag class do you think most unknown words belong to? Can you identify rules (e.g. based on morphological cues) that can be used to tag unknown words? You may define separate python functions to exploit these rules so that they work in tandem with the original Viterbi algorithm.
Why does the Viterbi algorithm choose a random tag on encountering an unknown word? Can you modify the Viterbi algorithm so that it considers only one of the transition or emission probabilities for unknown words?
 
You have been given a 'test' file below containing some sample sentences with unknown words. Look at the sentences and try to observe rules which may be useful to tag unknown words. Your final model will be evaluated on a similar test fil
 
Data
For this assignment, you’ll use the Treebank dataset of NLTK with the 'universal' tagset. The Universal tagset of NLTK comprises only 12 coarse tag classes as follows: Verb, Noun, Pronouns, Adjectives, Adverbs, Adpositions, Conjunctions, Determiners, Cardinal Numbers, Particles, Other/ Foreign words, Punctuations.

Note that using only 12 coarse classes (compared to the 46 fine classes such as NNP, VBD etc.) will make the Viterbi algorithm faster as well.

 Goals
You can split the Treebank dataset into train and validation sets. Please use a sample size of 95:5 for training: validation sets, i.e. keep the validation size small, else the algorithm will need a very high amount of runtime.


